CHAPTER 1
Traditional chocolate making
1.1 History
As early as 1900 BC cocoa was being used as a beverage by the Mokaya people
in Mexico (Powis et al., 2007). Cacao trees were subsequently cultivated
by the Aztecs of Mexico long before the arrival of the Europeans. The beans
were prized both for their use as a currency and for the production of a
spiced drink called “chocolatl”. The Aztec Emperor Montezeuma is said to
have drunk 50 jars or pitchers per day of this beverage, which was considered
to have aphrodisiac properties, a belief still held as late as 1712, when
The Spectator newspaper advised its readers to be careful how they meddled
with “romances, chocolate, novels and the like inflamers …”. The chocolate
was prepared by roasting the cocoa beans in earthenware pots, before grinding
them between stones. The mixture was added to cold water, often with
other ingredients such as spice or honey, and whipped to a frothy consistency
(Whymper, 1912).
The first cocoa beans were brought to Europe by Columbus as a curiosity,
but were later exploited commercially by Don Cortez as a new drink (Minifie,
1980). The Spaniards preferred their drink sweetened, and in this form its
popularity spread to Central and Northern Europe. In 1664 it was mentioned
in England in Pepys’ Diary, but was essentially still restricted to the wealthy.
The introduction of milk into this chocolate drink was first recorded in the UK
in 1727, by Nicholas Sanders (Cook, 1984), although his reasons for doing so
are uncertain.
A mixture of the ground cocoa beans and sugar would not by itself produce
the solid chocolate so familiar to the modern consumer. Instead it would give a
very hard substance which would not be pleasant in the mouth. In order to
enable it to melt easily, it is necessary to add extra fat. This can be obtained by
pressing the cocoa beans and removing some of the fat content, known as cocoa
butter. The ability to extract this fat was developed in 1828 by Van Houten of
Holland, and it had a double advantage: the expressed fat was used to make the
solid chocolate bars, while the remaining lower‐fat cocoa powder could still be
incorporated into a drink. This “drinking chocolate” was in fact usually
preferred, as it was less rich than the original high‐fat mixture.
Van Houten’s development is even more remarkable when one considers
that his factory and presses were entirely operated by manpower. In 1847, however,
 in Bristol (UK) Fry used recently developed steam engines to power the
first factory to produce tablets of plain chocolate.
The solid form of milk chocolate is normally attributed to Daniel Peter of
Vevey in Geneva (Switzerland) in 1875. In Switzerland, water‐powered
machines were able to operate for long periods at an economic rate. This enabled
the extra water from the milk to be driven out of the chocolate without incurring
 a large extra cost. Chocolates with moisture contents of above about 2% are
normally unacceptable as they have poor keeping qualities, as well as a poor
texture. The page of the notebook where he wrote his original recipe is shown
in Figure 1.1. In 1908 his invention of milk chocolate was disputed, so this notebook
 was taken to a lawyer, who placed his stamp at the top of the page.
Over the years many different flavours of both milk and plain (dark) chocolate
 have been developed. Sometimes there has been a definite policy to develop
a “house” flavour within a company, for example in Cadbury’s Dairy Milk, or the
Hershey Bar. At other times the flavour is adjusted to complement the centre of
the sweet to be coated with chocolate. A very sweet centre such as a sugar fondant
 may be best complemented by a relatively bitter chocolate and vice versa.
For milk chocolate, one of the biggest flavour differences is between the chocolates
 made from milk powder which are predominantly found in Continental
Europe, and the “milk crumb” ones of the UK and parts of America. Milk crumb
(see Chapter 6) is obtained by dehydrating condensed milk and cocoa mass. This
was developed where milk production was very seasonal. As cocoa is a natural
antioxidant, it was possible to improve the keeping properties of the dehydrated
form of milk over extended periods without refrigeration. The drying process
also produced a distinct cooked flavour, not normally present when the milk is
dried separately.
Table 1.1 summarises some of the important dates connected with the history
of cocoa and chocolate.
1.2 Outline of the process
Chocolate has two major distinguishing characteristics: its flavour and its texture.
 Although many different flavours of chocolate exist, all must be free from
objectionable tastes and yet incorporate at least some of the pleasant ones, which
the consumer will associate with the product. A primary feature of the texture is
that it must be solid at a normal room temperature of 20–25°C (70–75°F) and
yet melt rapidly in the mouth at 37°C (98.5°F), giving a liquid which appears
smooth to the tongue. The processing of chocolate is related to obtaining these
two criteria and is therefore devoted either to developing the flavour of the
product – using a raw bean would produce a very unpleasant taste – or treating
it so that the liquid chocolate will flow properly and be free from large gritty
material.
Although many different methods of chocolate‐making exist, most traditional
 ones are based on the process outlined in Figure 1.2 and briefly described
below. Further details are given in the relevant chapters of the book.


1.2.1 Preparation of cocoa nib – flavour development
The cocoa tree produces pods containing a pulp and the raw beans. The outer
pod is removed together with some of the pulp and the beans are fermented.
This enables chemical compounds to develop inside the beans, which are the
precursors of the flavour in the final chocolate. Failure to carry out this stage
properly cannot be rectified by processing at a later date. This is also true of the
subsequent stage, when the fermented beans are dried. Poor control here can
give rise to moulds, which give a very unpleasant‐flavoured product, even if the
fermentation has been carried out correctly. Similarly where beans are accidentally
 contaminated with smoke from a faulty drier, the resulting cocoa will be
unusable. In addition, correct transport conditions are required when the beans
are moved from the country of growing to that of chocolate manufacture.
On arrival in the processing factory, it is necessary to clean the beans to
remove metal and stones and other extraneous material that might contaminate
the product. Further flavour development is subsequently obtained by roasting the beans.
 This also loosens the shell round the outside of the bean and
enables them to break more easily. (Some chocolate manufacturers prefer to
heat the surface of the beans, to facilitate shell removal and to carry out the full
roasting of the cocoa bean centres, either as whole pieces or as a liquid following
grinding. This is described more fully in Chapter 3.) The beans are then broken
and the relatively lighter shell particles removed by a winnowing action. The
presence of shell in the final chocolate is undesirable as it will impair the flavour,
as well as causing excessive wear to the subsequent grinding machine. It should
also be noted that the shell content of chocolate is legally restricted in some
markets. In some countries the shell itself has found a use in horticulture.

1.2.2 Grinding – particle size reduction
Up to this stage the cocoa is in discrete pieces, several millimetres in diameter.
Subsequent processing may take several forms, but all require the solid cocoa
particles, sugar and any milk solids to be broken so that they are small enough
not to be detected on the tongue. The actual size depends upon the type of
chocolate and the market in which it is sold, but in general the vast majority of
particles must be smaller than 40 microns (0.0015 inch). The unground ingredients
 used to make dark chocolate are shown in Figure 1.3.
The most common method of achieving this is by the use of roll refiners. In
order to enable the chocolate ingredients to pass through the refiner, however, it
is necessary to get them into a paste form. This may be done in a variety of ways.
One of the most common is to grind the nib to form cocoa mass, which is a liquid
at temperatures above the melting point of cocoa butter, 35°C (95°F). This usually
involves hammer mills, disc mills, ball mills, three‐roll refiners or a combination
of the four. The sugar can then be added in a granulated or milled form and the
two mixed with extra fat (and milk powder if milk chocolate is being manufactured).
 The mixing may include some grinding, and traditionally a melangeur

pan was employed for the purpose. This machine has a rotating pan, often with a
granite bed, on which two granite rollers rotate. Scrapers ensure mixing by directing
 the material under the rollers (Figure 1.4). The modern requirement for continuous higher
 throughput methods has often lead to the mixing and grinding
being carried out separately. Probably the most widely used, is to mix the initial
ingredients into a paste and then grind this on a two‐roll refiner. This gives a sufficient
 amount of crushing and mixing to provide a particle size and consistency
suitable for feeding to the five‐roll refiner (see Chapter 9).
Where chocolate crumb is used, this dehydrated mixture of condensed milk
and cocoa mass is normally preground to a maximum size of 2mm (0.1 inch).
This is then crushed and mixed with fat in order to provide a suitable paste for
processing in a refiner.
The most widely used alternative method is to mill the solid ingredients (i.e.
sugar, milk powder and/or crumb) separately and then mix with the liquid
components (cocoa mass, cocoa and cow’s butter and lecithin) in the conche.


This may result in different flavours from when all the ingredients are processed
together. Niediek (1994) attributes this to the fact that, when sugar particle are
broken, the surface becomes very reactive and is able to pick up any flavour
components in the vicinity. These will be different if the cocoa is present, as in
the combined milling, rather than if the ingredients are ground separately.

1.2.3 Conching – flavour and texture development
Although the fermentation, drying and roasting are able to develop the precur
sors of chocolate flavour, there are also many undesirable chemical compounds
present. These give rise to acidic and astringent tastes in the mouth. The object
of conching is to remove the undesirable flavours, while developing the pleasant
ones. In addition, the previous grinding process will have created many new
surfaces, particularly of sugar, which are not yet covered with fat. These uncoated
surfaces prevent the chocolate flowing properly when the fat is in a liquid state.
Because of this the chocolate cannot yet be used to make sweets and does not
have the normal chocolate texture in the mouth. The conching process
(Chapter 10), therefore, coats these new surfaces with fat and develops the flow
properties, as well as modifying the flavour.
This is normally carried out by agitating the chocolate over an extended period
in a large tank, known as a conche. The mixing continuously changes the chocolate
surface and this, coupled with some heating and ventilation, enables the volatile
components to escape and the flavour to be modified. Some manufacturers prefer
to limit the conching time by restricting the conching process to primarily one of
liquefying the chocolate. This is made possible by treating the cocoa mass at an
earlier stage, in order to remove some of these less desirable volatile chemicals.

1.3 Concept of the book
Chocolate making was, for over 100 years, a traditional industry governed by
craftsmen who developed individual methods of working, as well as “house”
flavours for products. With increasing economic demands for higher through
puts and less labour, the industrial manufacture of chocolate has become more
and more mechanized. There has also been an increased application of science
and technology to control production plants and enable them to operate
efficiently.
In this situation the equipment manufacturers are introducing new machinery,
whilst the literature abounds with new methods of manufacture and patents for
“improved” techniques. Certain basic principles of chocolate making exist, how
ever, and the aim of this book is to show what these are and how they can be
related to the processes used in its manufacture. It has been intended to avoid
making the book a catalogue of a selected number of machines and products. In
order to try and achieve this and to give the book as wide a coverage as
possible, authors have been chosen from a range of industries and research institutions in

Europe, North America and Australia. Chapters have deliberately been kept
relatively short, and to a certain extent they follow the order of processing
described in this chapter.
Certain topics have been divided into two, for example the chemical changes
involved during conching have been presented separately from the physical and
engineering aspects, as most authorities tend to concentrate predominantly on
one or other of these aspects of conching. In addition to the technical side, plant
hygiene, intellectual property and nutritional values have become increasingly
important within the chocolate industry. Chapters have therefore been included
to provide an overview of these subjects.
The manufacture of chocolate goods would not exist but for the consumer. What
is seen on the market shelves is seldom the chocolate itself, but usually the container.
For this reason the packaging, marketing and legal requirements for the product is of
considerable importance and chapters on these three topics are included in the book.
Every author has contributed to the book as an individual. Each chapter, there
fore, is the author’s responsibility and may or may not be in agreement with the
theories or principles adopted by the company by whom he or she is employed, or
by the editors. As the chapters were written concurrently with little contact
between the authors, several topics were duplicated. This has been minimised
where possible, but retained where authors have given additional or even contra
dictory information. The latter is bound to occur owing to the present incomplete
understanding of the processes involved. Minor differences in machinery or ingre
dients can produce major changes in the product. Each author, therefore, is merely
reflecting his own experience within the wide range of combinations possible in
chocolate making. The multinational authorship of the book highlighted the
differences in terminology and units found throughout the industry. For example,
the term “refinement” means flavour development in some countries and grind
ing in others. For this reason, and to aid people unfamiliar with the industry, a
glossary of terms has been included at the end of book. The units given are those
with which the author is most familiar, but frequently the most widely used alter
native is also quoted. In addition, some of the more commonly used physical
constants associated with chocolate making have been included in this edition.
