CHAPTER 2
Cocoa beans: from tree to factory

2.1 Introduction
The earliest evidence of consumption of cocoa is from 1900 to 1750 BC by
the Mokaya people, a pre‐Olmec culture from what is nowadays the southern
part of Mexico and Guatemala (Powis, 2007). Later, cocoa was first cultivated
and domesticated by the Mayan and Aztec peoples. It was consumed in vari-
ous forms: as fresh beans for its sweet pulp or as a cocoa drink after roasting.
Beans were also used as a currency until the Spanish conquest (Wood and
Lass, 1985). The Spaniards introduced cocoa to Europe where it was first con-
sumed by royals, before becoming a popular beverage by the mid‐seventeenth
century.
Cocoa is the essential ingredient of chocolate, responsible for its unique
flavour and melt in the mouth properties. A manufacturer needs a reliable
and sustainable supply of good quality cocoa at reasonable prices. This chapter
examines how the growing of cocoa and the fermentation, drying, storage
and transport can influence cocoa quality prior to arrival at the factory. Also
discussed are the operations of the cocoa markets, quality assessment, sustain-
ability and environmental issues. Finally, the chapter explores the use of dif-
ferent types or origins of cocoa for chocolate.
Cocoa has a long supply chain extending from smallholders, often in
remote, less well‐developed tropical regions of the world, to factories and
consumers mainly in developed industrial countries. Like any crop, it is
susceptible to changes in the weather, to pests and diseases and to social and
economic factors. The supply of cocoa has continued to grow throughout the
past 30 years despite low prices on the world markets since 1990. At the
same time, demand for cocoa has kept pace with supply and is growing
steadily. About two‐thirds of the cocoa crop ends up in chocolate products,
with the remainder going mainly into beverage, ice cream and bakery
products.

2.2 Growing cocoa
2.2.1 Where cocoa is grown
Cocoa is grown commercially between 20° north and 20° south of the equator,
in areas with a suitable environment for cocoa (e.g. rainfall, soil type). There are
three main growing areas: West Africa, South East Asia and South America (see
Figure 2.1). The seven largest cocoa producing countries are Côte d”Ivoire (Ivory
Coast), Ghana, Indonesia, Nigeria, Cameroon, Brazil and Ecuador, and between
them they account for 90% of the world crop (see Figure 2.2). Côte d”Ivoire
alone produces over one‐third of the world crop. The fortunes of the various
countries have changed significantly in recent decades. A main feature of the
current pattern of production is the huge concentration (nearly two‐thirds)
within West Africa. This concentration means that future supply is vulnerable to
a number of factors, such as the spread of pests and diseases, weather or climatic
variations, political or social change. In many areas, cocoa faces competition
from other crops such as palm oil, coffee, rubber, citrus and cloves. About 90%
of the world’s cocoa is grown by smallholders (Smith, 1994), usually on farms
with mixed cropping systems.
2.2.2 Varieties of cocoa: Criollo, Forastero, Trinitario
and Nacional
The cocoa or cacao tree (Theobroma cacao, L.) originates from South and Central
America. It is a small tree up to 15m height (50ft; Mossu, 1992) that grows
naturally in the lower storey of the evergreen rain forest in the Amazon basin.
The leaves are evergreen and are up to about 300mm (12 in) long. The flowers
and hence the fruits (cocoa pods) grow from the trunk and thicker branches (see
Figure 2.3).
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries cocoa was introduced into Asia.
These early movements of cocoa were of a type called Criollo. Criollo cocoa
beans have a white or light brown appearance when cut open and a mild, nutty
cocoa flavour. The trees are susceptible to diseases and produce low yields. This
type is now very rare and only found in old plantations in Venezuela, Central
America, Mexico, Madagascar, Sri Lanka and Samoa.
The main type of cocoa is called Forastero and, in the eighteenth century, a
Forastero variety of cocoa from the Lower Amazon was introduced into Bahia in
Brazil. This variety of cocoa is called Amelonado, named after the melon shape
of the pods. From Bahia, cocoa cultivation spread to West Africa in the nine-
teenth century (Wood, 1991). The Amelonado variety was well suited to West
African smallholder cultivation. More recent planting material is based on cocoa
collected from the Upper Amazon rainforest and these maybe crossed (hybrid-
ised) with the Amelonado or between themselves (called Upper Amazon
hybrids). Fresh Forastero cocoa beans have a purple appearance when cut open
and generally develop strong cocoa notes after fermentation and roasting.

The third type of cocoa is called Trinitario. The origin of the Trinitario varie-
ties is usually stated as the result of hybridisation between Forastero and Criollo
trees. Consequently, some Trinitario varieties produce cocoas with special fla-
vours such as dried fruits or molasses.
The fourth type is Nacional which is only grown in Ecuador and probably
originates from the Amazonian area of Ecuador. Nacional cocoa produces beans
with “Arriba” flavour renowned for its floral note (see Section 2.7.8). Nacional
is highly susceptible to witches’ broom and frosty pod rot (Monilia) diseases. Pure
Nacional varieties have almost disappeared and the varieties with Arriba flavour
in Ecuador are hybrids between Nacional and Trinitario.
Genetic studies propose 10 different groups of cocoa (Motamayor et al.,
2008), which include Criollo, Amelonado and Nacional groups; but Trinitario
is no longer recognised as a separate group. This genetic knowledge will help
with breeding programmes to develop new improved varieties. The objectives

of breeding programmes are to produce cocoa varieties that are early bearing,
resistant to pests and diseases, drought tolerant, higher yielding and some-
times with better flavour or other quality attributes.
The type of planting material originally introduced into an area has strongly
influenced the type of cocoa grown today and hence the quality and uses of the
cocoa beans (see Section 2.7).

2.2.3 Climatic and environmental requirements
Cocoa grows in areas of high rainfall, preferably 1500–2500mm (60–100 in),
evenly distributed throughout the year. If there is a dry season of more than
three months, some form of irrigation may be necessary. Cocoa prefers high
humidity, typically 70–80% during the day and up to 100% at night. Strong dry
winds can defoliate the tree and very strong winds or hurricanes can cause
physical damage.
The temperature requirements are a mean monthly minimum of 18°C (64°F)
and a mean monthly maximum of 32°C (90°F). The absolute minimum is about
10°C (50°F).
Quite a wide range of soil is suitable for cocoa, but it grows best where the
soil is deep, with good drainage and a pH of neutral to slightly acidic. Soil influ-
ences one important quality aspect of cocoa: the cadmium content. Some soils,
especially volcanic ones, can contain high levels of cadmium. If this is in an
“available” form, it may be taken up by the plant and become present in the
beans (see Section 2.6.4).

2.2.4 Propagation of the planting material
The most common method of propagation is by seed. Good planting material may
be obtained from selected parents by using hand pollination. These hybrids may
also have hybrid vigour, giving faster growth and earlier bearing. Growing cocoa
from seed produces a tree with a straight, single, vertical trunk with branches at
around 2m (6.5ft) above the ground. This point, where the trunk separates into
branches, is called the jorquette. Trees grown from seed tend to be more drought
tolerant and require less pruning. However, they often exhibit a great deal of
variability in their agronomic characteristics which is not desirable. This can be
overcome by using one of the techniques of vegetative propagation such as cut-
tings, grafting or micropropagation systems. Grafting can be onto young seed-
lings, small plants or even mature trees. Grafted trees tend to have a more open
branching structure, usually without the straight single trunk associated with
seedling (hybrid) cocoa.
Micropropagation systems are under development: one system involves
culturing some cells and growing them into plantlets, which are then transferred
to a nursery. Micropropagation enables more rapid propagation of new varieties
developed by plant breeders. The trees have a similar structure to seedling‐grown
trees. All the vegetative methods produce trees that are identical genetically to
the original tree and therefore perform similarly in respect to yield, disease

resistance and quality parameters. The plants are initially grown in a nursery
and, after 3–6 months, they will be ready to plant out in the field.

2.2.5 Establishment and development of the plants in the field
The selection of a suitable site is very important and needs to take into account
local factors, such as weather conditions (especially rainfall, temperature and
wind), soil fertility and drainage. Prior to planting, the site is prepared, which
normally involves some land clearance and establishing some form of shade
(unless it is already present). Shade protects the trees from excessive sunlight and
wind. Initially shade requirements are high for young cocoa trees and it is com-
mon practice to plant a temporary shade of bananas or plantains (see Figure 2.4).
Cocoa trees are usually planted to achieve a final density of 600–1200 trees/
ha (1500–3000 trees/acre). In the first year, the cocoa is often inter‐cropped
with food crops. Trees come into bearing when they are 2–3 years old and full
yield is achieved after 6–7 years. They have an economic life of 25–30 years or
more, provided they are consistently looked after with good agricultural prac-
tices. Maintenance of the tree is mainly pruning (to keep to a canopy height of
3–5m (10.0–16.5ft)) and weed control. Depending on the soils, natural or
approved chemical fertiliser may be applied to correct deficiencies and so increase
yields, although this is unusual on small holdings.

Growth occurs in “flushes” when each shoot on the tree grows a few fresh
new leaves at the same time. The timing and extent of this “flush” growth
depends on recent rainfall and the state of the tree.

2.2.6 Major pests and diseases
It is generally agreed that about 30% of the crop is lost to pests and diseases. The
main pests and diseases are black pod rot, witches’ broom disease, frosty pod rot
(Monilia), vascular streak dieback disease, swollen shoot virus, capsids, mirids
and the cocoa pod borer moth. Squirrels, rats and monkeys can consume signifi-
cant quantities of ripe pods. Further information is given in Table 2.1.


Control of these pests and diseases is achieved by a combination of using
appropriate planting material, good agricultural practices, sanitation and careful
application of approved pesticides. In some areas, cocoa growing is not viable
because of the effects of pests and diseases. Due to the cost of pesticides, many
small‐holders do not use them.

2.2.7 Flowering and pod development
The flowers develop from flower cushions located on the trunk and branches.
They are small, about 15mm (0.6 in) in diameter (see Figure 2.5). Flowering
depends on the environment, the condition of the tree and the variety. Some
trees flower almost continuously whereas others have well‐defined periods
(generally twice a year). The flowers are pollinated by small insects such as
midges. Out of thousands of flowers, only small proportions are pollinated and
develop into pods.
The small pods are known as cherelles. If there are too many for the tree to
support through to maturity, the excess stop growing and die (this is known as
cherelle wilt). After 5–6 months the pods are fully developed. They measure
between 100 and 350mm long (4–14 in) and have a wet weight from 200g

(7oz) to more than 1kg (2.2lb; Mossu, 1992). There is considerable variation in
the shape, surface texture and colour of the pods, depending on the variety.

2.2.8 Harvesting, pod opening and yields
When they ripen, most pods change colour, usually from green or red to yellow
or orange (see Figure 2.6). They are cut by hand from the trunks and branches.
This is easily done with a machete (cutlass) for the pods that are low on the
trunk, but for the pods on the upper branches it is necessary to use a special
knife fixed on a long pole. The crop does not all ripen at the same time, so har-
vesting has to be carried out over a period of several months. Pods are normally
harvested every 2–4 weeks (see Figure 2.7). Frequent harvesting reduces the
losses to cocoa pod borer moth, rats, squirrels and monkeys. It allows the farm-
ers to sanitise the plantation by removing diseased pods and thus reducing the
impact of diseases. In West Africa, the main harvest period is from the beginning
of October until December. Cocoa purchased from farmers during this period
and up to March is termed “main crop”. This is generally of higher quality than
the secondary or intermediate harvest known as the “mid” or “light” crop.
The pods are opened to release the beans, either by cutting with a machete
or cracking with a simple wooden club. Pods opened with a machete can result


in injuries to workers and damaged beans if the machete cut is too deep. It is
therefore recommended to use a wooden tool. There are some 30–45 beans or
seeds inside the pod attached to a central core or placenta (see Figure 2.8). The
beans are oval or a plump almond shape, and covered in a sweet, white muci-
laginous pulp. The beans are separated by hand and the placenta is removed.
Each bean consists of two cotyledons (the nibs) and a small germ or embryo,
all enclosed in a skin or testa (the shell). The cotyledons serve both as the storage
organs containing the food for the development of the seedling and as the first
two leaves of the plant when the seed germinates. Much of the food stored in
the cotyledons consists of cocoa butter that amounts to about half the weight of
the dry seed. The moisture content of the fresh beans is in the region of 65%.

The yields obtained from cocoa trees vary considerably. Yield depends on the
variety of cocoa grown, the growing system (tree density, shade levels, fertilisation,
irrigation), the age of the trees, the farming practices (e.g. maintenance), the local
environment (weather, soil fertility), and losses caused by pests and diseases. Yields
of dry beans can vary from 150kg/ha (132lb/acre) in a poorly maintained small‐
holding, through typical West African levels of 250–450kg/ha (220–400lb/acre) to
that achieved on some plantations, which can be over 2500kg/ha (2200lb/acre).

2.2.9 Environmental and sustainability aspects of cocoa
cultivation
In the past, expansion of cocoa production has been from new small‐holdings in
former areas of primary forest that previously have been logged for timber. This is
not a sustainable model for the future. There is potential to increase productivity
by better control of pests and diseases, improved higher yielding and disease‐
resistant planting material and better farming practices.
If an area of primary forest has been logged, then cocoa growing becomes
one of the most environmentally beneficial uses of the land. Essentially this is
because it is a stable tree crop, often grown as part of a mixed cropping system
including shade trees. Cocoa farms support a relatively high biodiversity and
have been shown to be an important habitat in Central America for migrating
birds. Tropical tree crop systems such as cocoa cultivation are important in pro-
viding vegetative continuity with residual areas of primary or secondary tropical
forests.
Sustainability programmes (e.g. CocoaAction, coordinated by the World
Cocoa Foundation) aim at improving the social conditions and livelihood of
cocoa farmers, and ensure the long term supply of cocoa to the industry. Most of
these programmes involve governments, industry and non‐governmental
organisations (NGOs) working together in a coordinated manner. To provide
consumers with confidence and trust, there are several certification schemes
such as Rainforest Alliance™, Fairtrade International®
and UTZ Certified™ who
carry out inspections and allow their logos to be used on product packs (see
Section 2.5).

2.2.10 Labour practices on farms
Cocoa production in West Africa is mainly on small family farms using labour‐
intensive methods (see Section 2.5). Following media allegations about forced
child labour in Côte d’Ivoire there have been some independent studies into
labour practices (e.g. Gockowski, 2006; Fair Labour Association, 2012). The vast
majority of labour on cocoa farms in West Africa is adult and is in one of three
basic categories: full time seasonal, casual labour for a specific task or a share‐
cropping tenancy (where the share‐cropper provides labour on part of the farm
in exchange for a share in the crop proceeds). Family children are involved,
especially during busy harvest periods and can be exposed to hazardous tasks

such as using a machete or carrying heavy loads. Gockowski (2006) also
reported that less than 1% of cocoa farms employed adolescent workers, that
child slavery was uncommon and cocoa producing households sent more of
their children to school when compared to non‐cocoa producing households.
There is no doubt that cocoa growing provides significant benefits to many rural
economies. Most sustainability programmes include elements on the elimina-
tion of child labour.

2.3 Fermentation and drying
The immediate post‐harvest processes of fermentation and drying are normally
carried out on the farm. They are essential steps during which the cocoa flavour
precursors are formed. Drying produces a stable, non‐perishable commodity
making the crop ideal for small‐holders in remote locations.

2.3.1 Fermentation
Fermentation is carried out in a variety of ways and some of the common prac-
tices will be described below. The fermentation stage is usually very simple (see
Figure 2.9). The fresh beans are heaped in a pile or in a wooden box, typically
for five days. Natural yeasts and bacteria multiply in the pulp, causing the break-
down of the sugars and mucilage. Much of the pulp then drains away as a liquid.
Different types of cocoa require different amounts of fermentation.
If the fresh beans are dried without any fermentation, the nib will be a slaty,
grey colour rather than the brown or purple‐brown colour of fermented dried
cocoa beans. Chocolate made entirely from slaty, unfermented beans tastes very
bitter and astringent with little cocoa flavour. It also has a greyish brown appear-
ance. Beans from some origins are only partially or insufficiently fermented.
Generally these beans can be used to manufacture cocoa butter, but if they are used
to make other cocoa products, they require blending with fully fermented cocoas.
In West Africa, where smallholders grow nearly all the cocoa, fermentation
is usually done in heaps enclosed by banana leaves. Heaps can be used to fer-
ment any quantity from about 25–2500kg (55–5500lb) of fresh cocoa beans,
although intermediate amounts are desirable. Some farmers will mix the beans
on the second or third day. The fermentation usually lasts about five days and
the end point is determined by experience. This traditional low input system
produces well fermented cocoas.
In plantations, fermentation is normally carried out in large wooden boxes
that typically hold 1–2t of wet/fresh beans. Well‐designed boxes have provision
for the liquefied pulp (the sweatings), to drain away and for entry of air. This is
usually achieved by means of small holes in the bottom of the box or preferably
through a floor of slats each separated by about 6mm (0.25 in). Boxes usually
measure 1.0–1.5m (3.3–5.0ft) across and may be up to 1m (3.3ft) deep. However,

shallow bean depths (250–500mm; 0.8–1.5ft) are preferred, especially at the
start of fermentation, to promote good aeration which is needed for fermenta-
tion. To increase aeration and ensure uniformity of fermentation, the beans are
usually transferred from one box to another each day. The length of fermentation
is the same as for smallholders, but some plantations ferment for longer periods
such as 6 or 7 days.

2.3.2 Microbiological aspects of fermentation
Micro‐organisms are responsible for the breakdown of the pulp that surrounds
the beans. Their activities result in the death of the bean embryo and they create
the environment that enables the formation of cocoa flavour precursors (see
Chapter 8).
The pulp is an excellent medium for the growth of micro‐organisms since it
contains water and 10–15% sugars. When the beans are removed from the pods,
the pulp is inoculated naturally with a variety of micro‐organisms from the envi-
ronment. The fermentation process can be considered in three stages:
Stage 1 – Anaerobic yeasts. In the first 24–36h, yeasts convert sugar into alcohol
under conditions of low oxygen and a pH of below 4 (i.e. quite acidic). Bean
death usually occurs on the second day and is caused by acetic acid and alco-
hol (the rise in temperature is relatively unimportant).
Stage 2 – Lactic acid bacteria. These are present from the start of the fermentation,
but only become dominant between 48–96h. Lactic acid bacteria convert sug-
ars and some organic acids into lactic acid.

Stage 3 – Acetic acid bacteria. These are also present throughout the fermentation,
but become more significant towards the end when aeration increases. They
are responsible for converting alcohol into acetic acid. This is a strongly exo-
thermic reaction that is mainly responsible for the rise in temperature. This
can reach 50°C (122°F) or higher in some fermentations.
In practice, there is considerable overlap between the stages. The types of
micro‐organisms vary between fermentations and between regions.

2.3.3 Development of cocoa flavour precursors
Development of the cocoa flavour precursors occurs in the cotyledons during
fermentation and drying (see also Chapter 8). There are two important types of
cells within the cotyledons: the storage cells containing fat and proteins and the
pigment cells containing polyphenolic compounds and methylxanthines (theo-
bromine and caffeine). During fermentation, there is firstly the initiation of ger-
mination of the seed. This causes the uptake of water by the protein vacuoles
within the storage cells. Later, after bean death has occurred, the cell walls and
membranes break down, allowing the various compounds and enzymes to react
together. These reactions produce the cocoa flavour precursors (see Figure 2.10).
The reaction rates are determined by the temperature and the level of acidity.
There are several groups of compounds responsible for flavour. The methyl-
xanthines impart bitterness. During fermentation, their levels fall by around
30%, probably due to diffusion from the cotyledons. There are a range of poly-
phenolic compounds (called flavonoids) which are responsible for the colour, for

imparting astringency in the mouth and for the antioxidant health benefits asso-
ciated with cocoa (see Chapter 22). Their levels drop significantly during fer-
mentation and drying. The anthocyanins (a type of flavonoid) are rapidly
hydrolysed to cyanidins and sugars by glycosidase enzymes. This accounts for
the bleaching or lightening of the colour of the purple cotyledons in Forastero
cocoa. Other enzymes (polyphenol oxidases) convert another type of flavonoid,
the flavanols [comprised mainly of (–)‐epicatechin] to quinones. Proteins and
peptides complex with the polyphenolic compounds to give the brown or brown/
purple coloration that is typical in fermented dried cocoa beans. Another impor-
tant group of compounds is the Maillard reaction precursors. These are formed
from the storage proteins and sucrose. Sucrose is converted by invertase into
reducing sugars. The storage proteins are hydrolysed by peptidase enzymes into
oligopeptides and amino acids. These cocoa flavour precursors are involved in
Maillard reactions during roasting of the cocoa beans to form cocoa flavour
compounds.

2.3.4 Drying
When fermentation is finished, the beans are removed from the heap or box for
drying. In areas where the weather is comparatively dry at harvest time, the
beans are dried in the sun by being spread out during the day in layers about
100mm (4 in) thick on mats, trays or a terrace on the ground. Sun drying is
environmentally friendly, low cost and produces beans of good quality. In West
Africa, the beans are spread on any suitable horizontal surface (e.g. a concrete
terrace or polythene sheet – see Figure 2.11). The preferred method, which is
common in Ghana, is to spread the beans on mats made of split bamboo, which
are placed on wooden frames at waist height (see Figure 2.12). The mats can be
rolled up to protect the beans when it rains. They have several advantages: the
air circulation is improved, it is easier to sort the beans and remove defectives
and foreign materials, and there is less risk of contamination compared with
beans being dried at ground level. In all cases the beans are raked over at inter-
vals, heaped up and protected at night or when it rains. In Central and South
America, a common method is to spread the beans on a floor or platform, with
a roof on wheels that can be pushed back over the floor at night or when it rains.
Alternatively, the platforms themselves are arranged on wheels so that several
can be run under a single roof, one above the other to save space. It usually takes
about a week of sunny weather to dry down to the 7 or 8% moisture content
needed to prevent mould growth during storage.
Where the weather is less dry and sunny at harvest time, improved methods
of solar drying or artificial drying are adopted. Various low technology solar dry-
ing systems have been developed. These generally involve the use of a transpar-
ent plastic tent or roof over the cocoa and sometimes additional solar energy
collectors. In on‐farm trials, some of these systems have proved to be very effi-
cient and effective.

In some circumstances, artificial drying is the only practical solution. In the
simplest form, a wood fire is lit in a chamber below the drying platform and the
combustion gases are conducted away in a flue that continues beneath the dry-
ing platform before becoming a vertical chimney. Convection and radiation from
the fire chamber and flue heat the drying platform. A better system is to use a
heat exchanger to create warm dry air that is then passed through the bed of
cocoa beans. A well maintained installation will in all cases help reduce the risk
of combustion products coming into contact with the drying cocoa, and hence
the risk of contaminating the cocoa with smoky notes.
Artificial drying can affect the cocoa quality in two ways. First, the beans may
be dried too quickly resulting in very acidic beans. This is caused by the shell
becoming hard and locking or trapping the volatile organic acids inside the bean.
Acidity can be reduced by using lower air temperatures or an overnight rest
period to allow the moisture in the beans to equilibrate. The reduction in drying
capacity or throughput is compensated by lower fuel costs resulting from more
efficient drying. The second, more serious, problem with artificial drying is that
smoke may find its way onto the beans. This problem is most commonly linked
to the use of wood fires, and is liable to produce an unpleasant harsh, smoke or
tar taste, which cannot be removed from the resulting chocolate by processing.
While it is comparatively easy to design a drier in which the smoke is kept away
from the cocoa, it is not so easy to maintain one in this state. After a drier has
been operated for a number of years, the risk of smoke reaching the cocoa beans
too often becomes a reality. This is one of the reasons why cocoas from some
areas are in less demand and consequently command lower prices.
Cocoa beans can sometimes be seen drying on the roadsides in areas where
farmers do not have sufficient drying facilities. This is to be avoided as it contrib-
utes to the contamination of the cocoa beans with chemical residues from the
tarmac and vehicle exhausts.
Care is also required not to over‐dry the beans. Beans dried to below 6%
moisture become quite brittle and are easily damaged in subsequent handling,
generating losses. During or after drying the beans, it is necessary to carry out a
hand sorting or mechanical sieving/winnowing process to remove debris,
clumped and broken beans. The beans are then bagged and may be stored for a
short period prior to sale (see Figure 2.13).

2.4 The cocoa supply chain
Cocoa beans have to get from the many small farmers, who are often in remote
areas of developing countries, to the cocoa processing factories that may be
located in temperate countries. They can pass through a number of intermediar-
ies, each of whom plays an important role. This section describes the steps in the
chain, the impact on quality and how the price is determined. The next section


looks at the cocoa value chain and the issue of farmer poverty. The price of cocoa is
given in US$ or GB£ per tonne and is determined in the open markets of New York
and London. The evolution of prices, production and consumption (demand or
“grindings”) is given in Figure 2.14. From this graph one can note that production
and consumption are closely balanced and have grown steadily at the same rate.
However, prices are more volatile and are influenced by production, consumption,
stock levels, political, social and economic factors and speculator activity.

2.4.1 Internal market
Typically, the farmer sells his cocoa to a co‐operative or a trader (first level col-
lector). The important points for a farmer are the price received (% of world
market price) and the level of service provided (location and frequency of collec-
tion, availability of “free” credit, technical support etc.). The cocoa will then be
taken and sold to a larger trader or collector in the nearest main town. From
here the cocoa will go to the port and into the warehouse of an exporter or
shipper.

2.4.2 International cocoa markets
Producers (cocoa growers, co‐operatives, government marketing boards and
exporters) need to be able to sell their cocoa at the best price. The size and timing
of the crop vary from season to season and this can affect the price. The users
of cocoa (processors, grinders, and chocolate manufacturers) require a regular

supply of cocoa of assured quality at competitive prices into their factories. The
international cocoa markets function as intermediaries between producers and
users, allowing prices to be established and providing opportunities for risks to
be reduced for all parties.
There are two types of cocoa market: first, the “Actuals”, cash or physical
market and, second, the “Futures and Options” or “Terminal” market.

2.4.2.1 “Actuals” market
Anyone who buys and sells physical cocoa beans can be considered as participat-
ing in the “Actuals” market (Dand, 1999). In practice, virtually all business is
conducted using standardised contracts for sales that were developed by the
cocoa trade associations. These are the Cocoa Merchants’ Association of America
(CMAA) and the Federation of Cocoa Commerce (FCC) in Europe.
Both associations provide arbitration procedures to resolve disputes. The
basis of the contract prices in the “Actuals” market is determined by the price in
the “Futures” or “Terminal” market. In the “Actuals” market, it is possible to buy
or sell forward, for example to buy cocoa beans in June for delivery in September.

2.4.2.2 “Futures and Options” or “Terminal” markets
These markets can be used to minimise the risk of adverse price movements for
the producer, trader and the user. They are primarily “paper” markets in that no
physical cocoa usually changes hand. There are two active futures markets run
by the InterContinental Exchange (ICE): one in New York and the other in
London. The markets have standard contracts, which are restricted to certain
weights (multiples of 10t, the lot size), certain grades or types of cocoa. They
also state where and when the cocoa could be delivered. Each trade passes
through a central body or clearing house in the market. Trading is conducted
openly so the volume, price and delivery dates are public.

Although futures trading rarely results in the delivery of physical cocoa, this
possibility means that the price has to remain close to the actual value of the
cocoa. This value is determined by supply and demand and the activity of specu-
lators. The role of speculators is often considered to be negative as their aim is to
maximise their profit. However, they risk their capital and contribute by bring-
ing liquidity to the market (e.g. by enabling a producer to sell when users are not
buying).

2.4.2.3 Example of a simple hedge using the “Actuals” and “Futures”
markets
Traders, manufacturers and producers can use a simple hedge to reduce the risks
associated with adverse changes in price (adapted from Dand, 1999). For exam-
ple, it is normal for manufacturers to purchase physical cocoa for delivery in the
months ahead. This is to guarantee that the factory will have a supply of cocoa.
If we are in May and want to purchase 1000t of cocoa for delivery in December,
we deal with a trader (in the Actuals or physical market) and agree a price of,
say, US$ 2000/t. If we believe that prices may rise above this level in the next
few months, we could do nothing and come December we would take delivery
of 1000t of cocoa at what would then be a favourable price. If, however we
thought prices might fall, perhaps due to an exceptionally large crop, we would
turn to the Futures and Options market. In this market we would sell 100 lots of
10t for delivery in December. The price changes in each market are then likely
to offset each other (Table 2.2). This can be seen in the simple example below
where the cocoa price declines by US$ 100 between May and December.
In this example the manufacturer has made a profit in the Futures market of
US$ 100 000 when he purchased 100 lots to square his position (i.e. to avoid
having to deliver the lots of cocoa he sold in May). Whilst this profit is real, had
he waited until December to buy his physical cocoa, he would have saved US$
100 000 over the price he paid back in May. This is given as an assumed loss in
the example above. So, the manufacturer has effectively guaranteed the delivery
of cocoa in December into his factory but at the same time has cushioned himself
(or hedged) against a fall in prices through the Futures market. Hedges can be
used by traders, manufacturers and producers to “lock” a price and hence reduce

the risks associated with price fluctuations. In addition to hedging there are
several other trading techniques.

2.4.3 Shipment of cocoa
Cocoa is traditionally stored and transported in jute (or occasionally sisal) sacks
containing 60–65kg (132–143lb) of dry beans. Jute sacks have a number of
positive features: they are strong, stackable (do not slip over each other), breath-
able (allow moisture to pass through) and are made from natural biodegradable
fibres. Sacks can be stacked directly into the hold of a ship (break bulk). This
method has the disadvantage of requiring significant handling at the ports,
which is both costly and time‐consuming. Alternatively, sacks can be placed
within ventilated shipping containers (12.5t to a maximum of 18t of beans per
container).
Cocoa beans can also be transported in bulk. Loose cocoa beans can be placed
directly into shipping containers (17.5–25.0t of beans) or directly into the hold
of a ship, similar to grain shipment (mega bulk). Up to several thousand tonnes
can be transported in one hold. Bulk shipment methods are gaining in popular-
ity, and it is estimated that about 70% of cocoa beans shipped to northern
European ports now use one of these bulk methods.

2.4.4 Moisture movement during shipment
Cocoa beans can release water vapour during a voyage. There can be a 1% loss
in weight (shrinkage) due to this release of moisture. The West African crop is
mainly shipped during the winter months in the Northern Hemisphere. It may
be loaded at a temperature of about 30°C (86°F). After a few days into the voy-
age, the temperature both of the air and the sea will start to fall and, within a
few more days, on reaching the North Atlantic it may be down close to freezing
point. These are the conditions under which moisture will condense onto the
cold metal of the ship and drip onto the cocoa. Hence good ventilation is essen-
tial, along with the use of absorbent lining materials to prevent condensation
from damaging the beans.
Although the cocoa beans are dry, a hold containing 1000t of cocoa at 7%
moisture amounts to 70 000l (15 000gal) of water. If the moisture content of the
cocoa reduces by only one‐quarter percent to 6.75%, this releases 2500l (560gal)
as water vapour which is available for condensation. This quantity of water, in
the absence of good ventilation, is more than sufficient to cause wet patches on
the cocoa beans, leading to mould growth.
As well as taking precautions during shipment, it is important to unload the
cocoa promptly on arrival. Bags with damp patches can be segregated and dried
prior to a decision being made as to their fate. In the case of bulk cocoa, on dis-
charge any damp beans near the edges will be thoroughly mixed back into the
bulk during the handling, and the moisture will re‐equilibrate quite quickly
within the lot, usually before there is time for mould to develop.


2.4.5 Storage of cocoa
Once they have been dried, cocoa beans are quite stable and will not deteriorate
for several years, provided they are kept under good conditions. In order to pre-
vent the growth of mould during storage, moisture in cocoa beans must not
exceed 8%. High moisture levels can result from inadequate drying, moisture
pick‐up in humid atmospheres and leaking or damp stores.
Bagged cocoa should be stored off the floor (e.g. on wooden pallets) and
away from the walls in dry ventilated warehouses. Individual lots of cocoa
should be clearly segregated and labelled. Cocoa beans are susceptible to tainting
by uptake of certain odorous substances from some other commodities (e.g.
spices) and chemicals (e.g. fuels, paints, agrochemicals and cleaning substances).
Therefore, they should not be stored in the same warehouse as these materials.
Warehouses should also be free from vermin and infestation (see Section 2.4.6).
In the tropics, when it is very humid (e.g. at night or during rainstorms),
ventilation can be temporarily stopped and then restored when the humidity
drops again (e.g. during the day or in drier weather). Storing cocoa under poly-
thene sheets is not recommended other than for very short periods of time.
The jute sacks allow water vapour to pass through, so that the cocoa beans
gradually come into equilibrium with the humidity in which they are stored.
The graph in Figure 2.15 shows the equilibrium moisture content for cocoa
beans stored at different levels of relative humidity. To maintain beans below 8%
moisture, the relative humidity must be less than about 75% for fermented
cocoa beans. Less well fermented beans, such as those from the Dominican
Republic and Sulawesi, are more hygroscopic and would need to be stored at a
relative humidity below about 65% to maintain moisture of 8% or less. Partially
fermented beans are more likely to stick together or form clumps and develop mould during storage and transport.

Cocoa can be stored in bulk in large heaps confined by walls to form bays,
each bay containing 1000 or more tonnes of beans. A more expensive way of
bulk storage is in silos. Storage bays and silos can have forced ventilation sys-
tems. This enables control of the temperature and humidity of the beans. It is
also possible to apply modified atmosphere – usually air that has a low level of
oxygen and a high level of carbon dioxide. This will control any pests within the
cocoa (see Section 2.4.6).

2.4.6 Infestation of cocoa
Various insect pests can feed on cocoa beans and many lots of cocoa will have some
low level of infestation. However, significant infestations are nowadays quite rare.
Cocoa is vulnerable to a very small moth, the Tropical Warehouse moth
(Ephestia cautella). The larva (caterpillar) enters a bean, usually where the shell
is damaged, and feeds on the nib leaving a residue of silk and droppings. Various
beetles and their larvae also feed on cocoa beans. Insect damage will be visible in
the “cut test” (see Section 2.6.3).
Some insects only rarely enter the beans, feeding mostly on the residue of
pulp adherent to the outside. Their presence can result in a consignment being
described as severely infested, even though the cut test on a sample of beans
does not reveal any insect damage.
Precautions must be taken to prevent infestation developing during storage
and shipment. This should include routine monitoring for the major pest spe-
cies. Control measures need to be applied as required to the structure of the store
or ship. Only pesticides approved for use in food stores should be used.
Cocoa beans can be fumigated with phosphine under gas‐proof sheeting. When
carried out properly, fumigation is very effective and the cocoa should not need
fumigating again. Unfortunately, very few fumigations are carried out effectively
and frequently some stages of the insects (e.g. the eggs) survive the treatment. In
some countries, there is evidence that some pests are becoming resistant to phos-
phine. Various alternative solutions are available. Some methods rely on the use of
very low temperatures (below freezing) or warm temperatures (around 50°C;
122°F) to kill the insects. Another method is to use modified atmosphere, usually
oxygen depleted with high levels of carbon dioxide. These methods have the
advantage that there are no chemical residues. In any case, insects will be killed and
fragments of insects will be removed during the bean cleaning and roasting steps.

2.5 The cocoa value chain: long‐term perspectives
and challenges
The long‐term viability of the chocolate industry depends on a sustainable cocoa
supply chain. One of the most fundamental prerequisites for a supply chain to
be sustainable is that its participants make a reasonable living from it. The vast
majority of cocoa is grown by small‐holders for whom it is a cash crop with no
food or cultural value. Most farmers live below the poverty line and this does not
encourage investment and development of the farms. In many cases, other crops
are more profitable or require less labour. Although crop diversification is good,
as it provides more stable incomes, there is an issue relating to the small size of
many farms which means efficiencies and overall income will remain low.
Another crucial element is the poor level of maintenance of the cocoa planta-
tions, including lack of control of pests and diseases. In many areas, a further
threat to the cocoa supply chain is that the farmers are ageing and the younger
generations tend to migrate to the cities.
Therefore, the challenge is to transform cocoa farming into a more profitable
business. This would help to make cocoa more competitive versus other crops.
Ultimately, bringing cocoa farmers out of chronic poverty would help to retain
or attract young farmers.
Consumers are becoming more aware and conscious of where and how their
food is grown and processed. In response to this and other concerns, governments
and the industry have implemented sustainability programmes in collaboration
with NGOs and certification programmes such as Rainforest Alliance™, Fairtrade
International®
and UTZ Certified™ (see Figure 2.16). The main objectives of these
certification programmes are detailed in Table 2.3.

Even though the main focus of the different programmes vary, most of the
schemes supported by the industry aim at developing a sustainable cocoa supply
chain through a common approach structured around three pillars:
1 Increasing the productivity: by improving planting material (yield, disease
resistance), teaching and implementing good agricultural practices (GAPs),
improving the access to fertilisers and the use of irrigation where required.
2 Improving the living standards of cocoa producing communities: by focusing
on education, women’s empowerment, the elimination of child labour, access
to clean water, hygiene and health services.

3 Optimising the supply chain: by making it more transparent and shorter, so
that farmers receive a higher part of the cocoa price, and to ensure the required
traceability of cocoa beans.
The quantity of cocoa produced under these schemes has seen enormous
growth in recent years. In the season 2012/2013 an estimated 1 438 000t was
produced (Fountain and Hütz‐Adams 2015). From the statistics it appears that
less than half of this cocoa is actually sold as certified cocoa. However, consump-
tion is seeing similar growth, with several companies committing to using 100%
sustainable cocoa by 2020 or thereabouts.
The World Cocoa Foundation (WCF), several chocolate manufacturers and
the governments of Côte d”Ivoire and Ghana have started to join forces under a
common initiative (CocoaAction) in order to build on the strengths and the
experience developed through the various individual programmes. This will
allow harmonising the companies and private‐public partnerships and develop-
ing a coordinated strategy.
The challenge for the future is to measure and demonstrate the impact of
these programmes for the communities in a harmonised and comprehensible
way. Another challenge is also to achieve a sustainable development across the
whole of the cocoa supply chain without encouraging over‐production of cocoa,
by managing production versus demand and thus the price of cocoa beans. This
has traditionally been a role of the International Cocoa Organisation (ICCO).

2.6 Quality assessment of cocoa
2.6.1 Composition of cocoa beans
Cocoa beans are essentially comprised of the cotyledons which are protected by
the shell. Broken fragments of cotyledon are called nib. The shell is usually con-
sidered to be a waste material and is either used as a fuel or composted and sold
as garden mulch. However, it can be treated, ground to a powder and sold as
cocoa fibre products. These materials can be used as a substitute for cocoa pow-
der or incorporated into chocolate (depending on local regulations).
The nib is the most valuable part of the bean. Roasted ground nib (cocoa mass
or cocoa liquor) is used directly in chocolate manufacturing. Alternatively it can
be pressed to extract the fat, cocoa butter, an essential ingredient in chocolate (see
Chapters 3 and 7). The residue from the pressing stage, the press cake, is then
ground into cocoa powder which is used mainly in beverages, baking, ice cream
and desserts. Table 2.4 shows the composition of cocoa beans, nib and shell.

2.6.2 Cocoa beans: quality aspects and contracts
Good quality beans are a prerequisite for the production of a good quality choco-
late. The quality aspects of cocoa beans can be divided into three areas:
1 Food Safety. These are absolute standards. Some of these limits are covered by
the national food legislation in the country where the factory is located or

where the products are to be sold. Any cocoa failing to meet food safety stand-
ards must not enter the human food chain. The fermentation and drying pro-
cess results in high microbial levels on raw cocoa beans and the occasional
presence of Salmonella bacteria. This hazard is controlled at the roasting stage
and/or by debacterisation prior to or after roasting (see Chapter 25). The pres-
ence of Salmonella is not a reason to reject a consignment of raw cocoa beans.
2 Economic factors. These relate to yield of useful material and are key determi-
nants of the price a manufacturer is prepared to pay relative to other cocoas.

3 Qualitative aspects. This includes desirable flavours and absence of off‐flavours
and some physical properties such as cocoa butter hardness. Qualitative fac-
tors determine whether a type of cocoa will be included in blends or recipes
for chocolate.
In addition to these three areas, consumers are increasingly concerned about
environmental and ethical aspects and some want environment friendly, organic
or Fairtrade certification and labelling. This requires total traceability of the
cocoa through the supply chain and compliance with the necessary standards
(see Section 2.5).
The quality requirements from a manufacturer’s view are summarised in
Table 2.5. However, most cocoa is purchased using standard trade contracts,
which may not include all the aspects considered important by the manufac-
turer. In Europe, the Federation of Cocoa Commerce (FCC) sets contract stand-
ards for cocoa bean quality. In the United States, the Food and Drugs
Administration (FDA) and The Cocoa Merchants’ Association of America
(CMAA) set the standards (see Table 2.6). The cocoa trade associations have
arbitration schemes to cover the situation when the lots of cocoa tendered fail to
meet the contract terms and this may result in the supplier having to pay an
allowance or replace the disputed beans. The producing countries usually have
their own internal standards that are often mandatory (ITC, 2001).

2.6.3 Cocoa beans: sampling and the “cut test”
Proper sampling is an essential first step to making an assessment of quality.
Cocoa beans in sacks are sampled using a trier or sampling stick, which is inserted
between the fibres of the bag. Typically between 20% and one‐third of the sacks
will be sampled according to one of several prescribed procedures. Alternative
arrangements are made for cocoa shipped in bulk. The samples maybe combined
and bulked or mixed and then reduced in size (“quartered”).
First, beans are classified by weight (usually the number of beans in 100g (3.5oz).
Second, the level of unsatisfactory beans (also termed faulty or defective
beans) is determined by the “cut test” (see Figure 2.17). This test identifies beans
that are visibly mouldy, slaty (i.e. unfermented), infested, germinated, or flat
(i.e. containing no nib or cotyledon). The cut test normally uses the same beans
that have been weighed and counted. Many methods specify that 300 beans will
be cut lengthwise to expose the cotyledon. This is somewhat tedious and the
number of beans is frequently reduced, which also lowers markedly the statisti-
cal validity of the results. Alternatively, a guillotine device is available (Magra
cutter), which will cut 50 beans at a time.
Mould is especially undesirable. Indeed, even as few as 3% mouldy beans
can give unpleasant musty or mouldy flavours to chocolate. Some moulds under
certain conditions also produce harmful fungal toxins collectively called myco-
toxins (see Section 2.6.4). Mouldy beans can have high levels of free fatty acids
(FFA) which affect the quality of the cocoa butter (see Section 2.6.5).


Slaty beans are beans in which more than 50% of the cotyledon is grey or
slaty in colour. These beans have not undergone fermentation and they have a
low level of cocoa flavour with high levels of astringency. The cut test is often
used to assess the degree of fermentation by counting the fully brown, brown/
purple and purple coloured beans. This is very subjective and is unreliable except
when a single assessor is checking beans from a single source. The results do not
correlate directly with the quality of the chocolate made from the beans.
Insect‐damaged beans are those where the bean has been penetrated by an
insect, which feeds on the cotyledon. These should not be present. Any number
will involve loss of material and a risk of contamination with fragments of the
insects. Germinated beans are those where the seed has started to grow before
being killed during the fermentation or drying process and the shell has been
pierced by the growth of the first root. In the dry germinated bean, the root usu-
ally drops out, leaving a hole, which makes the bean more easily attacked by
insects and moulds. Flat beans are those which have begun to form, but have
not developed or filled out. There is no useful cotyledon in them so they simply
add to the shell content, which is waste.
For the chocolate manufacturer, the yield of nib from a lot of cocoa is eco-
nomically very important, as is the amount of cocoa butter within the nib.
Higher levels of cocoa butter mean that lower amounts will need to be added
later on in the manufacturing process. Nib yields are determined in the labo-
ratory, normally by shelling a number of beans by hand. Results are usually
expressed on a dry basis (i.e. at 0% moisture). It is important to note that

laboratory measurements do not take account of bean cleaning losses and ease
of winnowing. Therefore actual yields should be assessed on the production
plant (see Chapter 3).

2.6.4 Contaminants and residues
Modern methods of analysis can detect minute or trace levels of undesirable mate-
rials in foodstuffs (see Chapter 25). This has given rise both to some legitimate
concerns and some “food scares” which were not based on sound rationale.
Heavy metals, such as lead and cadmium, are found at very low levels in
many foodstuffs including cocoa products. The source is mainly environmental
including soil type, fertilisers, pesticides or vehicle emissions. The levels found
depend on the origins of the cocoa materials and the recipe and process. There is
a concern that some products could provide a significant proportion of the toler-
able daily intake. Therefore, limits on cadmium are proposed, ranging from 0.2
to 2.0mg/kg, depending on the level of cocoa solids in the product (dark choco-
late with >50% cocoa solids will have the high limit). These limits will be applied
in the European Union from 1 January 2019.
Mineral hydrocarbons have been used in the past in manufacturing jute
sacks. Very small quantities of mineral oil were transferred to the cocoa beans
and then into cocoa products. As a result of a joint initiative covering several
foodstuffs, the sack manufacturers carried out some developments and have
switched to using a food grade vegetable oil.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), such as benzo‐a‐pyrene [B(a)P]
result from combustion products and are generally present at low levels in the
environment. In cocoa, the main risk is from artificial drying or sun drying in
polluted areas such as roadsides. Hydrocarbons are fat soluble and will be found
at higher concentrations in cocoa butter.
Mycotoxins [such as ochratoxin A (OTA) or aflatoxin] are produced by some
types of moulds under certain conditions. However, there is no correlation
between the level of visible mould revealed in the cut test and the amount of
mycotoxins present. Generally, aflatoxin is not a concern in cocoa. OTA is present
in cereals and most agricultural commodities. In cocoa, it is frequently present at
extremely low levels, and cocoa products are not a significant source of OTA in
the diet. OTA appears to develop in damaged pods prior to the fermentation stage.
The manufacturer needs to have a monitoring process in place for these con-
taminants and also needs to keep aware of new, potential contaminants. In all
cases, the manufacturer must ensure food safety and compliance with the rele-
vant legislation.

2.6.5 Cocoa butter hardness
The quantity of fat and its melting characteristics, especially hardness, depends on
the variety or type of cocoa, the fermentation and drying and the environmental
conditions (see Chapter 7). In particular, the average daily temperature during the

last few months of pod development affects the hardness of the cocoa butter.
Lower temperatures give butters that are softer or have a lower melting point.
Generally, cocoa butters made from Indonesian beans are harder than West
African butters, which in turn are harder than Brazilian butters from Bahia region.
Mouldy cocoa beans, caused by inadequate drying, contain high levels of
FFA. This also has an undesirable softening effect on the cocoa butter and the
level of FFA is limited by regulations in some countries (e.g. 1.75% in the coun-
tries of the European Union) and by FCC contract rules.
Quality criteria that can be applied to the semi‐processed cocoa materials
(cocoa butter, powder and mass) are described in Chapter 3.

2.6.6 Sensory evaluation
Flavour is the most important property for chocolate consumers and hence man-
ufacturers (see Chapter 21). Off‐flavours (such as smoke or putrid over‐fermen-
tation flavours) can be readily detected by tasting roasted ground nib or cocoa
mass (cocoa liquor) directly. Alternatively these can be made more palatable by
mixing the mass with finely ground sugar and/or water or preparing a small‐
scale dark chocolate. These tests are essential for beans from origins that are
inconsistent in quality or prone to off‐flavours. The level of cocoa flavour and
other flavours (such as acidity, bitterness, astringency and any ancillary flavours
for fine cocoas) are more difficult to assess. A well‐trained sensory evaluation
panel with appropriate test designs and statistical analysis of results is required.

2.7 Types and origins of cocoa beans used in chocolate
Chocolate manufacturers need to produce a product of consistent quality from a
raw material that may be variable. It is common practice for chocolate manufac-
turers to purchase cocoa mass or liquor from cocoa processors. Increasingly,
these may be situated in the cocoa producing countries (known as origin
processors).
The only significant volumes of cocoa exports in the world are from West
Africa and Indonesia; the other large producing countries having internal mar-
kets for their cocoa products. It is usual to apply some selection to the origin and
type of cocoa beans or mass used for chocolate making. Cocoa processors will
frequently blend beans from different origins and/or deliveries to achieve a con-
sistent product of the desired quality. In choosing the type of cocoa and the
recipe or blend there are a number of factors to consider. These include availabil-
ity of the required quantity of beans, the reliability of supply, consistency of
quality (especially flavour), price, yield (both of cocoa mass and the % fat in the
mass) and how easy it is to process. Blending can be carried out before or after
roasting. If it is carried out after roasting, this allows different levels of roasting
to be used for different types of beans.

2.7.1 Sources of bulk cocoas
Over 95% of the world’s cocoa production is classed as “bulk”, “basic” or “ordi-
nary” cocoa. This does not refer to the delivery size or method of transportation,
neither does it imply cocoa of inferior quality. Bulk cocoas generally come from
the Forastero type cocoa trees (see Section 2.2.2). They are used to manufacture
milk and dark chocolate, cocoa mass, cocoa butter and cocoa powder. The other
type of cocoa is “fine” or “flavour” cocoa (see Section 2.7.9).
Some of the characteristics of the main origins and types of cocoa are
described below.

2.7.2 Côte d’Ivoire
Since 1977 the Côte d’Ivoire (Ivory Coast) has been the world’s largest producer
of cocoa. The country now produces about 1.5 million tonnes of beans each year
(ca. 38% of the world crop – see Figure 2.2). The cocoa is nearly all grown by
smallholders, many of whom are immigrants.
The type of cocoa grown is Forastero. Originally it was the Amelonado vari-
ety but this has virtually all been replaced by improved Upper Amazon hybrids
(see Section 2.2.2). Most cocoa is properly fermented in heaps and is sun dried.
Cocoa is often not fully dried on the farm. This can sometimes lead to higher
levels of both mould in the beans and FFA in the cocoa butter. Cocoa beans are
dried to final moisture and blended in the ports to achieve minimum export
grade standards. This cocoa tends to have a slightly lower yield of nib and cocoa
butter than cocoa from Ghana, a fact which is reflected in the price.
A significant quantity of Côte d’Ivoire cocoa (ca. 30%) is processed locally
and the semi‐finished products exported. The local market for confectionery is
very small. The 2012 cocoa reform by the government has contributed to restor-
ing quality and reducing the vulnerability of the supply.

2.7.3 Ghana
Cocoa first arrived in West Africa in the late nineteenth century from the island
of Fernando Po (Bioko) into Ghana. Cocoa growing developed strongly during
the twentieth century. Ghana is currently the second largest producer in the
world with around 21% of the world crop (around 870 000t – see Figure 2.2).
A large amount (ca. 25%) of the cocoa beans is processed locally.
The Ghanaian farmer uses the traditional heap method to ferment the cocoa
and drying is on raised mats in the sun. Due to absence of artificial drying, there
is no risk of smoke contamination. The hybrid planting material, based on Upper
Amazon Forastero and Amelonado varieties, and the traditional processing
methods give a full chocolate flavour, very suitable for the manufacture of choc-
olate. The quality control in the internal cocoa marketing system is also well
established and effective. This has resulted in Ghana cocoa being the world’s
foremost quality bulk cocoa against which other cocoas are judged. Hence, it
commands a price premium on the world market.

2.7.4 Indonesia
Cocoa production in Indonesia expanded rapidly at the end of the twentieth
century and is currently around 400 000t (ca. 10% of the world cocoa crop).
Cocoa is grown in most parts of Indonesia, but the principal areas are Sulawesi,
Sumatra and Java.
Indonesia is mainly a bulk cocoa producer with the cocoa coming from varie-
ties derived from Upper Amazon and Trinitario types.
In Sulawesi, most of the production is from smallholders but some 95% of
the production currently receives little or no fermentation. The cocoa is nor-
mally dried in the sun and is consequently free from the smoke contamination
frequently associated with artificial drying. The lack of fermentation produces a
cocoa that is very bitter and astringent. Fermented or partially fermented
Sulawesi cocoa has a medium level of cocoa flavour. It has high shell content
and a low percentage of fat in the nib. These factors explain why Sulawesi cocoa
is traded at a discount. For chocolate makers, the plus points are the hard cocoa
butter (high melting point) and the absence of off‐flavours (the bitterness and
astringency are flavours normal to cocoa). Sulawesi cocoa can be included in
blends with other beans to make chocolate.
Generally, Indonesian bulk cocoa is of variable quality although efforts are
underway to improve the quality. The majority of the crop (63% in the 2012/3
season; ICCO 2015) is processed in Indonesia. Purchasers of cocoa materials
should note that these factories may also import cocoa from West Africa and
other origins, mainly to improve the quality of the cocoa products.
There is a small production of a fine cocoa that is concentrated in Java. This is
a light‐breaking, “Criollo” type of cocoa (also called Java Fine or Edel cocoa).
Actually, this is not a true Criollo cocoa but a Trinitario type that produces white
cocoa seeds. Java light‐breaking cocoa is mainly used for its colour. A dark choco-
late made from these beans has the light brown appearance of a milk chocolate.

2.7.5 Nigeria
Production levels are increasing slowly and now stand at around 244 000t (6%
of the world crop). Cocoa in Nigeria is normally properly fermented and then
sun dried on concrete terraces. The cocoa is similar in type and quality to Côte
d’Ivoire, although quality is considered by some to be less consistent. Several
processors and manufacturers use Nigerian cocoa interchangeably with Côte
d’Ivoire or even Ghana cocoa.

2.7.6 Cameroon
Unlike the rest of West Africa, Cameroonian cocoa is of the Trinitario variety. It
is generally purchased to make reddish coloured cocoa powder. Very little
Cameroonian cocoa is used to make chocolate due to the risk of smoke flavour
(from the artificial drying) and the price which is sometimes at a premium. The
annual production is between 200 000–220 000t.

2.7.7 Brazil
Brazil used to be a substantial producer and exporter of cocoa. The largest cocoa
growing area in Brazil is in Bahia (around 65%), where cocoa is grown on both
medium sized farms and in large plantations. Brazilian production grew strongly
reaching just over 400 000t before declining sharply in the late 1980s and 1990s
due to Witches’ Broom disease becoming established in Bahia. Production has
now stabilised at around 210 000t.
Brazilian cocoa has a good level of cocoa flavour. It tends to be more acidic
than West African due to the fermentation method (in large wooden boxes). In
addition, artificial drying is the practice and it is not always done satisfactorily
due to the lack of maintenance of dryers. There is a risk of finding smoky fla-
vours, which can be reduced by careful selection of the beans. However about
25% of the production comes from the state of Para where the climate does not
require artificial drying. Hence the risk of smoky beans is reduced.
Brazilian cocoa butter from Bahia beans has a lower melting point (i.e. it is
softer) than West African.
There is a large local processing industry and market for chocolate
products. Consequently there is very little export of cocoa beans and 30 000–
60 000 t of beans are imported each year, mainly from West Africa to satisfy
local demand.

2.7.8 Ecuador
Ecuador is an exporter of bulk cocoa and the largest exporter of “fine” or “fla-
vour” cocoa (see Table 2.7). Its annual production is around 200 000t and is
foreseen to grow steadily until 2020. There is a small local processing industry.
The fine cocoa character comes from the Nacional cocoa and hybrids of Nacional
with Venezuelan Trinitario. This cocoa, commonly known as Arriba, has a full
cocoa flavour with additional floral spicy notes. Some manufacturers seek and
pay substantial premiums for good quality Arriba cocoa for use in speciality
chocolate. The availability of this cocoa is limited and is even decreasing, prob-
ably representing less than half of the Ecuadorian crop. New plantings of cocoa
frequently use the high yielding CCN51 variety. However, this variety does not
give Arriba flavour but a rather fruity and acidic flavour.

2.7.9 Speciality and “fine” or “flavour” cocoas
The term speciality cocoa covers a range of types or grades which generally com-
mand premium prices over bulk cocoas. They are not traded as a commodity but
have their own supply chains which preserve the identity of the individual lots
and frequently allow for the purchaser to test the quality prior to delivery. The
cocoas may be from specific geographic origins, crops or varieties, or even har-
vested and fermented in a specific way (see Sections 2.2.2, 2.3.1 and 2.5). The
market for chocolate products made from speciality cocoas has been showing
strong growth for over two decades (see Chapter 18).

“Fine” or “flavour” cocoas are the oldest and largest category of speciality
cocoa. There are various estimates for the export volume of fine cocoas (263
000t, ca. 9% of the world crop – see Table 2.5). There is no agreed definition of
“fine” or “flavour” cocoas except they are purchased at a premium price for their
flavour or colour (e.g. light-breaking). Also, according to the ICCO (2010), the
difference between fine and bulk cocoa is in the flavour rather than other qual-
ity aspects. Fine or flavour cocoas have some ancillary flavours that are described
variously as fruity, raisin, brown fruit, floral, spicy, aromatic, nutty, molasses and
caramel (Fowler, 1994). They are mainly used to make dark chocolate in which
their special flavours or colour can be appreciated. These cocoas generally come
from Criollo, Trinitario or Nacional type trees. However, not all cocoas of these
varieties are classified as “fine” or “flavour”. If they do not have the desirable
flavour characteristics or if the fermentation and drying is poor, they are traded
as bulk cocoas and may even sell at a discount to the main bulk origins. Prices
depend on supply and demand for each type. Typical premiums start from about
20%, rising to double or even treble the bulk cocoa bean prices.
The above definition of “fine” or “flavour” cocoa can be seen as subjective,
and people have attempted to find definitions based on scientific evidence. For
example Amores et al. (2007) found that the theobromine/caffeine ratio can
“clearly differentiate fine from bulk cocoa”.
The Arriba cocoa (see Section 2.7.8) from Ecuador represents ca. 50% of the
worldwide volume of fine cocoa. Amongst other “fine” or “flavour” cocoas, the
majority is from varieties of Trinitario trees, but some from Madagascar and
Venezuela is from much sought after light‐breaking Criollo varieties, although
not all their production is of this type. A unique cocoa to be mentioned is the
light‐breaking cocoa from Java, Indonesia (see Section 2.7.4).

Conclusions
It is impossible to make chocolate without cocoa, and its quality and availability
is of paramount importance to the confectionery industry. Therefore, no choco-
late manufacturer can afford to neglect this vital ingredient and remain divorced
from the issues surrounding cocoa production.
Cocoa makes a substantial economic contribution to many rural economies.
There is great potential to improve both yields of cocoa plantings and farmer
incomes. These are two challenges that need to be addressed by coordinated
actions from the industries, the governments and some NGOs. Also, with the
cocoa production concentrated in a few countries in West Africa, future supplies
are by no means assured.
Quality, including food safety, traceability, origins, sustainability, living conditions
of cocoa farmers and environmental impact are very important and will continue to
provide challenging issues to the complex supply chain that exists with cocoa.

Demand for cocoa products is expected to continue to increase, mainly due
to the universal appeal of the unique cocoa flavour and the history and myths
related to it. The ultimate objective is to ensure that cocoa, and thus chocolate,
can be enjoyed by as many consumers as possible. This requires the transforma-
tion of the cocoa supply chain into an efficient, profitable and sustainable one.
This is in the interest of consumers, the cocoa and chocolate industry and the
producing countries.